At the time of Independence, India as a nation had an agenda of action set out. This included, apart from becoming a vibrant democracy, the removal of social inequality and backwardness of all kinds, and the achievement of economic progress and equity. However, after 60 years of Independence, for all the achievements in the political, economic, and industrial arenas, we still have around 250 million people in dire poverty who do not have access to education, basic health, sanitation, and clean drinking water.
Down the years, the political success of Indian democracy could not be repeated on the economic front. The advantage of achieving Independence could not be harnessed economically for a period of 50 years.
No doubt, India has succeeded in feeding a population that has almost trebled since Independence. But in terms of living standards we have not fared satisfactorily and have lost out to those Asian countries with which we were on an equal footing in the 1950s. China had the same per capita income and living standards as India in 1947, but today it is twice as rich and known for higher living standards. At the time of Independence many studies showed that with its abundant natural resources and effective rule of law, India was more likely to achieve better growth than that achieved by many far eastern countries.
Through its Five-Year Plans the government not only directed domestic investment into favoured projects but also told business what to produce, how, where and in what quantities. Its panoply of permits, licences, and controls not only controlled prices, imports, and foreign direct investment but created monopoly importers of raw materials, and monopolies in the provision of infrastructure in various sectors.
Myopic political interference, red tapism, and lack of accountability nurtured a large public sector, which became inefficient and an import-competing enterprise. In turn, the public sector failed to supply adequate infrastructure and lost a valuable opportunity in exploiting the advantages in the labour-intensive manufacturing sector, and our concept of a mixed economy ended up as a mixed-up economy. Apart from this, the government’s inadequate investment in the areas of both education and health resulted in the neglect of human capital, which increased the intensity of poverty.
The result was a dispiriting 3-4 per cent growth rate till the late-1980s that came to be known in economics as the “Hindu Growth Rate,” which subsequently resulted in unsustainable development and a macroeconomic crisis including a balance of payments crisis in 1991. The 1991 crisis made it an economic compulsion that the country embark on a reform process. This reform process brought in the de-licensing of investment, decontrol of business decisions, lifting of many import controls, encouragement of foreign direct investment, reform of the tax system and, above all, the liberalisation of capital markets.
These reforms brought in macro-economic stability and took growth rates to new heights. Since the mid-1990s, the economy has been able to register an average growth rate of 6.5 per cent to 7.5 per cent a year. For the first time since Independence, double-digit growth rates are closer to reality. But on the other hand, the level of poverty reduction continues to be very nominal.
The liberalisation process opened up new avenues to accelerate development in different sectors. But what really transformed the perception of Indian business and announced the arrival of India in world business was Information Technology. Widespread English language skills, a scientific temperament, a strong work ethic and cost-effective labour made it the hub for not only business process outsourcing but also knowledge process outsourcing. Success in IT created a ripple effect and spurred businesses in other areas, thereby contributing to the creation of “Brand India.”
In spite of all this, providing a stark contrast, farmers are committing suicide; hunger, disease, and poverty are prevalent all over the country, with a lot of damage done to the environment.
Liberalisation and reforms do not seem to work for the common man and for the environment.
In spite of economic reforms, the gulf between the rich and the poor and the urban-rural divide is only getting wider by the day, and the dividends of the reforms are not reaching the common man.
Nearly 250 million people in India continue to live below the poverty line, and 70 per cent of them are in the rural economy where the benefit of the reforms has not percolated.
Dismal agriculture growth
In the recent past, the agricultural sector has registered a dismal 1.6 per cent growth rate and has been deteriorating, despite the fact that it provides employment to nearly 60 per cent of the Indian workforce. This is mainly on account of poor infrastructure, declining public investment including institutional credit, lack of minimum support prices, inadequate backward and forward integration, low value addition and low productivity which have increased the risk and uncertainty in agriculture due to globalisation and the World Trade Organisation regime. For the first time since the 1960s, India has started importing foodgrains. Apart from farmers, artisans also have been excluded from the process of liberalisation on account of lack of skill upgradation, absence of credit and direct access to markets.
The other reason for a large number of people remaining poor is their lack of access to basic health needs and education. In these areas India has lagged behind, compared to countries such as Sri Lanka and China.
The consequence of rural poverty was migration to urban areas, resulting in large-scale crowding of cities. The insecurity and vulnerability are pushing the rural poor to urban areas in search of livelihood. It is not only the poor but also the middle class that is finding it difficult to live in cities due to the rising cost of housing and other living needs. If the current trend of exodus persists, by 2025 half the population of India will be in the cities.


Promises to fulfil: Special emphasis on rural India, which has been left untouched by liberalisation, is needed
The economic growth in India during the last 16 years has not been participatory. In the social pyramid, there is an unprecedented level of consumption and opulence at the top, and remarkable deprivation, destitution, and oppression at the base.
The time has come for the country to look into the need for the development of an Alternative Economic Programme (AEP). The first and foremost task of an AEP will be to manage the contradictions that will make equitable growth a reality. This will be possible only if we can eradicate extreme poverty and hunger, achieve universal primary education, promote gender equality and empowerment, ensure environmental sustainability and adequate measures for the artisans to develop a network of positive partnerships within and outside the country.
Special emphasis on rural India, which has been left untouched by liberalisation, is needed. The renewal process needs to look into issues such as raising agricultural productivity, relieving debt distress, providing access credit, and increasing the coverage of extension activities.
Each of the above issues has larger scope in terms of what is to be achieved. The underlying principle for all this should be participatory growth cutting across all barriers.
The poor are to be made part of the development chain. This can be accomplished by proper and heavy investment in human capital, access to business capital, qualitative infrastructure, efficient and accountable administrative systems, and honing of skills and knowledge.
During my tenure as Chief Minister, I wanted to make Andhra Pradesh the foremost State in the country in terms of growth, equity, and quality of life. I developed a holistic and long-term plan with a vision to make it a poverty-free State by 2020, including a proposal to link the rivers from the Ganga to the Cauvery, which will not only help us tide over the cycle of famine and floods but strengthen national integration.
The Vision 2020 document envisages that Andhra Pradesh is a State where poverty is totally eradicated; where every man, woman, and child has access not just to the basic minimum needs, but to all the opportunities to lead a happy and fulfilling life; where there is a knowledge and learning society built on the values of hard work, honesty, discipline, and a collective sense of purpose.
This is true for the entire country and is a formidable challenge. And everyone in the country is conscious of it. India is at a threshold and Indians are confidence personified. We have with us a surfeit of opportunities that earlier societies did not have, to make India a developed country.
In this age of technology, nothing seems impossible be it the fisherman on the high seas using phones to realise the best prices for his produce, people in villages being treated by means of telemedicine from cities, education through new avenues including the Internet, and many more challenging opportunities.
Added to technology is enterprise and drive, which currently are in abundance in the country. Add innovation, a proactive government, and collaboration amongst the stakeholders; I am sure we have a successful recipe for equitable growth.
The time has come to fulfil the promises made at the dawn of Independence and prepare ourselves to meet the challenging tasks ahead, to build a vibrant and modern India filled with peace, prosperity, and happiness.
N. Chandrababu Naidu is the President of the Telugu Desam Party and a former Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh.Much reviled and caricatured as the ideas of a secular state and polity have been by sections of the middle classes, there is no question that without the adoption of secularism as a guiding principle in India’s governance these last six decades, this country could not have achieved the remarkable successes it did in its transformation into one of the world’s leading democracies and an emerging economic power. The doctrine of secularism, translating as it does into an institutionalised protection of religious liberty and pluralism, has facilitated a rare degree of social cohesion and political integration, enabling the emergence of a strong Indian national identity. As shown in the recent story of Mohammed Haneef, the Indian doctor, detained in Australia on suspicion of involvement in terrorism but eventually cleared and set free, his return to India became a matter of national rejoicing. But more indicative of Haneef’s pride in his country that had stood by him in his travails was his pointed declaration that an apology was due not to him but to India and its “peace-loving citizens.” India is the acknowledged home of people of different cultural and social identities who draw strength from its constitutionally enshrined promises to protect social and cultural diversity within its national boundaries. Its awesome democratic experiment has stood the test of time, defying the doomsday predictions of cynics refusing to believe that democratic values could take root and survive in conditions of extreme social and economic deprivation.
India’s adoption of secularism as a basic governing principle was part of its larger commitment to a democratic framework that was seen as vital to the effort to keep the new nation an integrated and cohesive entity. Opting for secularism as a core value of governance was not merely the exercise of a philosophical or conceptual preference of the leaders of the national movement, nor did it reflect a craven borrowing of western concepts, as has been alleged by critics of India’s secular nationalism. It was a shrewd and pragmatic decision, reflecting the collective wisdom of the framers of the Constitution, ranging from B.R Ambedkar to Ananthasayanam Ayyangar, to anchor the new nation-state to strong democratic foundations that would withstand the disintegrative tendencies of various divisive impulses such as religious, regional or linguistic chauvinism. The trauma of Partition, which saw families and communities wrenched apart in horrifying sequences of bloodletting, had left a bitter aftertaste as to the impact of assertions of cultural nationalism. If, on the one hand, the damaging effect of the yielding to Muslim separatism had shown in the agony of Partition, on the other hand was the equally unsavoury and dispiriting experience of the stirrings of Hindu cultural nationalism as expressed in the articulations of the Hindu Mahasabha, clamouring for a Hindu nationhood. All these divisive impulses wilted in the path of the triumphant ascendancy of a robust Indian nationalism drawing its strength from a powerful mass movement of people of diverse regional, cultural, social, and religious identities. Thus the inheritors of the new independent nation were all too conscious of their responsibility to protect the stakes of the diverse groups within the new national framework and were determined therefore to ensure that Indian national identity reflected this composite cultural legacy.
The second and more practical reason for the enduring success of secularism as a governing idiom is that it has been seen as one of many strands of a democratic fabric, protecting the rights of religious minorities, just as federalism offered a large degree of regional autonomy, linguistic pluralism protected the rights of linguistic groups and affirmative action addressed the problem of social backwardness. The emphasis placed on nation-building by the post-Independence leadership from Jawaharlal Nehru to Indira Gandhi, at least until her authoritarian impulses took over in her declaration of the Emergency in 1975, ensured that the periodic eruptions of sectarianism as manifested in communal clashes were swiftly contained. The deliberate cultivation of a secular national ethos with a stress on the need to consolidate national unity in the 1960s and 1970s rendered the politics of communal mobilisation ineffective.
— Photo: The Hindu Archives 

An orchestrated campaign of violence meant to intimidate the minorities resulted in the demolition of the Babri Masjid at Ayodhya on December 6, 1992, causing national outrage and international condemnation.
The success of these efforts to strengthen the sense of national unity could be gauged from the fact that despite two wars with Pakistan in 1965 and 1971, the Indian Muslim community neither rose to the bait thrown to it from external instigation by forces within Pakistan nor did it react angrily to the provocative needling by Hindu communalists here, suggesting that Muslims were sympathetic to Pakistan. The patriotism and national loyalty shown by Muslims during these times of war and strains with Pakistan, were equal to that of any other section of the Indian people. The understanding of secularism as the manifestation of a deeper commitment by democratic India to provide an umbrella for its diverse groups to flourish and have full expression of their cultural, social, and political rights has helped India weather many an internal political storm and an external challenge. It has also strengthened India’s moral authority and global influence, vis-À-vis countries such as its estranged twin, Pakistan, a self-confessed Islamic state, which by its failure to become a democracy and adopt inclusive and accommodative principles of governance, has been demonstrably unable to cope with the several death blows inflicted to its body politic.
The real test of the political capacity of India’s secular and inclusive governing framework was the rise of Hindu majoritarian nationalism in the late 1980s and the 1990s. Hindu majoritarianism, or the movement for Hindutva as its political campaign called itself, represented a formidable challenge because the target of its ire was the secular national ethos. What gave Hindutva its cutting edge was the sustained public campaign against secularism, arguing that it was nothing but camouflaged appeasement of minority groups, particularly Muslims. The political campaign targeting secularism and indirectly Muslims by suggesting they were the beneficiaries of “pseudo-secularist” appeasionist policies, encouraging their separatist proclivities, was accompanied by a movement for Hindu revivalism in the cultural sphere.
This demand for a reinstatement of Hindu cultural symbolism in the public arena, which militated against the ethos of India’s secular democracy, which had carefully insulated public life from religious symbolism of any kind, culminated in a campaign of orchestrated violence, carried out by the militant Hindu organisations, the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) and the Bajrang Dal, with the covert encouragement of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and under the explicit direction of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS). The orchestrated campaign of violence meant to intimidate the minorities resulted in the demolition of the Babri Masjid at Ayodhya in December 1992, causing national outrage and international consternation. The destruction of the 400-year-old mosque provoked an angry round of retaliation with Muslim extremists striking back in terror attacks in Bombay, Calcutta, and other cities, with bomb explosions killing several hundred. The carefully constructed edifice of secular democracy had never been in graver peril than in this period. The Hindutva movement, triumphalist in its defence of the traumatic assault on the sensibilities of the Muslim minority, publicly asserted that the Ayodhya campaign was a defining moment in the onward march of Hindu nationalism, thereby conveying to its constituency in the Hindu middle classes the illusory sense that its moment in Indian history had finally arrived.
Another deeply testing moment in Indian political experience was the Gujarat episode in 2002, when following the burning of a coach of the Sabarmati Express at Godhra, alleged to be the handiwork of Muslim extremists, large Hindu mobs, led by Hindutva activists and with the connivance of members of the Narendra Modi State administration, killed several hundred Muslims, injuring many more. The sordid tales of murder, rape, and arson that emanated from Gujarat from March to May 2002, added up to a dark chapter in India’s political history, causing nationwide revulsion and international condemnation. The majoritarian communal frenzy that had shades of ethnic cleansing brought home with chilling force the ground realities of polarisation and divisiveness that underlay the rhetoric of Hindutva. It was brutally apparent that the campaign for Hindu majoritarianism had no traction unless it was accompanied by strategies of intimidation and violence against minority communities, principally Muslims and Christians, on the ground. If Ayodhya and Gujarat epitomised the hate politics against Muslims, the burning to death of the Australian missionary, Graham Staines, exemplified the hatred directed at the Christian community.
The parliamentary elections of 2004, which saw the defeat of the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance, signalled the limits of the reach of the Hindutva campaign. It was suddenly and starkly evident as the erstwhile allies of the BJP began to hastily distance themselves from it, citing the Gujarat factor as a reason for their electoral defeat, that the political class as a whole had recognised that dabbling in the politics of majoritarianism would have high political and electoral costs. The underlying message of the repudiation of the politics of communal chauvinism is that the Indian people recognise that they are the inheritors of a multicultural legacy. They are also aware that they have invested heavily in dreams of economic empowerment and prosperity, goals that require a high degree of social cohesion and political integration, which the prevailing secular national culture with its emphasis on inclusiveness and mutual accommodation can guarantee. Therefore it does seem that the testing times for Indian democracy are finally over, the brief political flirtation with Hindu majoritarianism having proven to be a debilitating experience for the nation as a whole.
Malini Parthasarathy is Joint Editor, The Hindu.